GIS Project Ideas for Thesis/ Dissertation/ Internship
######################################################

:slug: gis-project-ideas

:date: 2010-10-25
:category: gis

Many students have asked me for ideas on what topic they should choose for
their Thesis. I have debated this myself when I was a student. The ideal topic
would be the one that allows you to dive into a topic deeply as well as give
you some practical skills that will help you landing a job. Here are some
pointer that may help you make that decision.


Create a Mashup
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A mashup is created by merging 2 or more sources of location data. There are
variety of free data available for you to experiment with and create unique
applications. Map mashups can be created using free tools such as Google Maps,
OpenLayers, GeoCommons Maker!

Develop a plug-in for an open-source GIS
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There is always a need to implement new features for open-source GIS software
like QGIS or MapWindowGIS. You can implement a cool feature or customize the
software for a particular domain. You will not only gain valuable experience
developing among the best programmers but also this will be an impressive
addition to your resume.

Work with an NGO
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Most often students struggle to find good quality free GIS data which can be
used in interesting ways. Contact local NGOs to see if you can help them
analyze their location-specific data. Most NGOs collect some form of loation
data and your GIS skills can come in handy to them. The result of such a
project could be a unique GIS project that uses real on-the-ground data.

Build a Campus GIS
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you are at a university, a good project would be to put together a
web-accessible campus information system. You could model the campus buildings
in 3D, use satellite imagery via an API and overlay data about your campus.
Such a system could be attractive to the administrator as well.

Develop a vehicle tracking system
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can buy a cheap GPS receiver and implement a vehicle tracking system. This
will get you exposed to GPS/GSM protocols and get you hands-on knowledge that
many companies worldwide are looking for. Add your own twist to the traditional
tracking system by specializing it for walking directions, bus travel, toursut
sightseeing, navigating the blind etc.

Do some 'Green' research
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Everyone is turning to green and sustainable technologies. As an intern or a
researcher, you could use your analytical skills to further the knowledge in
this area. Wind power, solar energy, climate change etc. are great topics for
GIS and Remote Sensing research.Analysing wind data to find best locations for
wind turbines or using remote sensing images to detect climate change are some
examples of projects. If you are a PhD student, you'll find these topics
complex and challenging enough for yor dissertation and you'll stand to recieve
grants or funds from governments as well.

Do you have more ideas to share? What project are you thinking of? Please leave
a comment and help the GIS student community!
